https://tricycle.org/trikedaily/duality-and-ethics/

The knowledge that the Buddha offered as protection attacked these problems on many levels—and the word attack is appropriate here. In the Tittha Sutta (“Sectarians,” AN 3:62), he did something that he rarely ever did, which was to seek out other teachers and denounce them sharply for their doctrines. The harm they were causing was that serious. He criticized, in particular, three teachings: that whatever pleasure or pain you experience is (1) determined by past actions, (2) determined by a creator god, or (3) occurs randomly, without cause of condition.

In each case, his criticism was the same: If you adopted any of these teachings, you’d believe yourself powerless in the present moment to change things here and now. You’d have no motivation to think in terms of what should and shouldn’t be done, because the choice would be meaningless. Since all your actions in the present moment, in your eyes, would either be predetermined or ineffectual, the duality between good and evil would be an empty convention.

The Buddha’s argument was the same in each of the three cases, so here are his words on just the first:

    In that case, a person is a killer of living beings because of what was done in the past. A person is a thief… uncelibate… a liar… a divisive speaker… a harsh speaker… an idle chatterer… greedy… malicious… a holder of wrong views because of what was done in the past.’ When one falls back on what was done in the past as being essential, there is no desire, no effort (at the thought), ‘This should be done. This shouldn’t be done.’ When one can’t pin down as a truth or reality what should & shouldn’t be done, one dwells bewildered & unprotected.


The implication here is that if a teaching is going to protect you, the first level of protection has to be on the theoretical level. You have to understand that your present actions are free, to at least some extent, to shape the present moment—for good or bad—and to have an impact on the future. This understanding of kamma would then provide you with motivation for looking carefully at what should and shouldn’t be done right now to avoid causing suffering.

And this is precisely the understanding of kamma that the Buddha taught. As he pointed out in the Loṇaphala Sutta (“The Salt Crystal,” AN 3:101), past actions do have an impact on the present moment, but how that impact is experienced is filtered through your present-moment mind-state. This is one of the reasons that Buddhist meditation focuses on being alert to what the mind is doing right now. If you’re sensitive to your present actions, you can shape them well enough to mitigate the influences from any past bad kamma and, through your present skillful kamma, to provide conditions for pleasure and happiness now and into the future.

This means that awakened people are consistently virtuous, but—unlike ordinary people still grappling with the precepts—they have freed themselves from having to construct an identity around virtue in order to maintain it. In other words, they don’t have to keep reminding themselves of the precepts, but their behavior still falls perfectly in line with what the precepts teach.

As for the general principles the Buddha taught for deciding what should and shouldn’t be done, they start on a very basic level with the instructions he gave to his son, Rahula, on how to purify his actions (MN 61). These boil down to the principle that you judge your actions both by the intentions motivating them and by the results they yield. If you can foresee that an action you want to do will cause harm, either to yourself or to others, you shouldn’t do it. If you don’t foresee harm, you can go ahead and do it but—in line with the power of actions to shape both the present and the future—you have to check for the results of the action both while you’re doing it and after it’s done. If, in the course of doing the action, you find that you’re causing unexpected harm, you stop. If you find out only after the fact that it caused harm, you talk it over with someone more advanced on the path and resolve not to repeat the mistake. This way you gain practical experience, based on your own powers of observation, in mastering the dualistic principle of what should and shouldn’t be done.

